---
layout: post
title:  "So I have a blog now"
image:
  path: "/assets/posts/so-i-have-a-blog-now/thumb.jpg"
  width: 256
  height: 256
comments_url: "https://twitter.com/Elttob_/status/1588821355319164929"
---
Twitter seems to be folding in on itself at the moment; might not be a good
hedge to keep all my writings on there. [I do have a Medium page](https://elttob.medium.com/),
but Medium is getting a bad rep due to a few questionable writers on there. So
now I'm here.

I'm kind of tired of depending on corporations, to be honest. I'm not some
idiotic free speech nut who thinks there's some secret conspiracy to shut down
blatantly neo-Nazi shit, of course; I just don't want to be the pawn in meeting
room games of increasing shareholder profits year over year. So instead of going
off to get some middle man to provide easy web software, I've used my own two
hands to build a static Jekyll blog to my exact specification, and host it on
GitHub. [You can add this website to your RSS/Atom reader if you'd like.](/feed.xml)

I like this. It's a quieter corner of the internet. By design, I've made this
website feel clean and empty of stuff; no sidebars shouting at you with
algorithmic trends or social information, just the content you actually came
here for, and an intellectual, respectful setting to consume it in. There wasn't
much to design, but nonetheless I've paid extra attention to make it all feel
well put together and pleasant. Also a great opportunity to trial run [Rasmus
Andersson's new Inter Display font variant](https://github.com/rsms/inter/discussions/463#discussion-4105311).

Beyond that though, it liberates my writing from the normal limitations of
homogenised social media. This is HTML and CSS! It's practically a digital blank
slate upon which I can do anything. If I'm trying to explore or explain an idea,
for example, I can build the perfect visualisation or interactive demo and embed
it directly into the post if I wanted to spend time doing that. I'll probably
mostly stick to dead tree stuff though - photos and code snippets are often
enough.

So, welcome to Technical Fluff. I think this could be fun occasionally.

![Hello, it's me](/assets/posts/so-i-have-a-blog-now/hello.jpg)